Ethics blog (#1080)
open-life-science/open-life-science.github.io: _posts/2025-09-25-ethics-what-is-our-approach.md

---
layout: post
title: "Research Ethics: What should OLS take into account?"
authors:
- rivaquiroga
- bethaniley
- iramosp
- yochannah
image: PIC-URL-HERE
photos:
  name: AUTHOR-HERE
  license: LICENCE-HERE
  url: AUTHOR-ADD-URL-HERE
---

**TL;DR:** You're invited to share your thoughts about what is important in research ethics on [this GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/open-life-science/discussions/1079), or via Slack in #general. 

> **Longer:** One of OLS's three core pillars of activity is research, focusing on creating and understanding a better evidence base for equity-serving open research. Some of our previous work includes Paz Bernaldo's Open Seeds Impact paper (currently in press with Wellcome Open Research), and our Alan Turing Institute funded "Widening participation in data science" policy work. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Longer:** One of OLS's three core pillars of activity is research, focusing on creating and understanding a better evidence base for equity-serving open research. Some of our previous work includes Paz Bernaldo's [Open Seeds Impact paper](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15593896) (currently in press with Wellcome Open Research), and our Alan Turing Institute funded "Widening participation in data science" policy work. 
```

## What we've done for ethics in the past

For the work listed above, we used [Pearl IRB](https://www.pearlirb.com/)'s independent ethical review board. In both cases, we were given ethics "waivers". That is, we still had to fill out a large number of forms asking us what we were doing, what our consent form looked like, what our research protocols were, how we'd store our data, etc. - but after this was reviewed we weren't asked for much else, and were told we could go ahead with the work. The process worked well, and was reasonably fast and easy to use, prompting us to think of important things and making sure we were ready to really do a good job. 

## We'd like to get a little bit more robust in our ethics processes. 

> OLS currently has research components built into two projects: OSPARK and Seeds to Systems. One thing we've learned while we were talking about this research is that our team comes from different backgrounds with very different experiences approaching when ethics reviews happen, and how they happen. Whilst many of us have conducted social research (e.g. interviews and focus groups), some of us have repeatedly been through ethics review processes, and others have done similar research in places where ethical review isn't expected outside a clinical setting. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OLS currently has research components built into two projects: [OSPARK]({% link ols-collab-research/index.md %}) and [Seeds to Systems]({% link seeds-to-systems-research/index.md %}). One thing we've learned while we were talking about this research is that our team comes from different backgrounds with very different experiences approaching when ethics reviews happen, and how they happen. Whilst many of us have conducted social research (e.g. interviews and focus groups), some of us have repeatedly been through ethics review processes, and others have done similar research in places where ethical review isn't expected outside a clinical setting. 
```

## Where we stand

> I'm sure it won't surprise anyone when we say that research ethics is incredibly important to us as a team and as a community! In some research settings, the term "ethics" doubles as "ensuring legal liabilities are met". In others, it might mean the difference between publishing in a peer-reviewed journal (with proof of an ethics process) or not being allowed to publish (without ethics). To OLS, it's probably both of those, as well as being trustworthy, thoughtful researchers. That means we have to be responsible for our own work and behaviour, regardless of any other review processes we might take part in. Which leads to the next question! 

Reviewer 3: _That means we WANT to be responsible_ 
(might be better to imply our strong position on this- we have to for publishing, but we really WANT to for other reasons)

> I'm sure it won't surprise anyone when we say that research ethics is incredibly important to us as a team and as a community! In some research settings, the term "ethics" doubles as "ensuring legal liabilities are met". In others, it might mean the difference between publishing in a peer-reviewed journal (with proof of an ethics process) or not being allowed to publish (without ethics). To OLS, it's probably both of those, as well as being trustworthy, thoughtful researchers. That means we _want_ to be responsible for our own work and behaviour, regardless of any other review processes we might take part in. Which leads to the next question! 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
I'm sure it won't surprise anyone when we say that research ethics is incredibly important to us as a team and as a community! In some research settings, the term "ethics" doubles as "ensuring legal liabilities are met". In others, it might mean the difference between publishing in a peer-reviewed journal (with proof of an ethics process) or not being allowed to publish (without ethics). To OLS, it's probably both of those: but we also aim to be trustworthy, thoughtful researchers. That means we _want_ to be responsible for our own work and behaviour, regardless of any other review processes we might take part in. Which leads to the next question! 
```

Reviewer 4: Rephrased this a little to move the emphasis on to being trustworthy and thoughtful (so it's clear this isn't an afterthought for OLS!)

## Looking for community input and opinions: What should we think about for OLS's formal research ethics process? 

> As a researcher, what would you like to see in a compassionate, carefully thought-out research ethics policy? What would you like us to avoid? Some examples based on discussion at our recent seeds to systems meeting: 

Author: ```suggestion
As a researcher, what would you like to see in a compassionate, carefully thought-out research ethics policy? What would you like us to avoid? Some examples based on discussion at our recent Seeds to Systems meeting: 
```

> ### Avoid:

Author: I wondered about this too - thanks! I'll make this longer

> ### Avoid:

Reviewer: Agree! I think this reordering will help in clarifying what we're asking input on. Could we highlight the specific questions we'd like to ask?

> ### Avoid:

Author: ```suggestion
### "Ethics" behaviours we want to avoid:
```

- "Your form doesn't have a phone number on it. Please revise and resubmit with a phone number." (8 months later, the ethics review passes, once they've had a phone installed in the lab, even though they never intend to use it).

> - "One of your forms says last updated on yesterday's date and not today's date. Please revise and resubmit. "

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

- "This is not human research, because it only involves talking to people, and doesn't involve any clinical interventions". (You can [read about the University of Minnesota getting banned from contributing to the linux kernel](https://www.theverge.com/2021/4/30/22410164/linux-kernel-university-of-minnesota-banned-open-source) if you'd like to understand the motivation for this one...)
- Assuming that just because something is legal or compliant with terms of service, that it is therefore okay. 

### Do: 
- Think carefully about how you would feel if you were a research participant in a given situation. 

> - Review research protocols and DMPs as a team to make them as robust as possible, before submitting to the IRB. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Review research protocols and data management plans (DMPs) as a team to make them as robust as possible, before submitting to the independent review board (IRB). 
```

- Share experiences from different scientific domains and legal systems. 
- Check that the research is as open as is possible whilst respecting other tensions such as privacy, conservation, and indigenous sovereignty.
- Use open data formats wherever possible. 

> - Prepare consent forms in as plain-english (or other language) as possible.   

Reviewer 3: lay language

> - Prepare consent forms in lay-language when possible.   

Reviewer 4: I've made this one a bit stronger - consent forms need to be accessible to the target group of people.

## Where is the line - what requires ethics review and what doesn't? 

> Given our varying experiences with research ethics, and the way we enjoy working with community, we want to formalise exactly _which_ types of interaction and knowledge gathering should go through the ethics process and how much. Here's a hypothetical scale, from least strict to most strict: 

Reviewer: >Here's a hypothetical scale, from least strict to most strict: 

Related to the previous comment around clarity on feedback request: Is this just hypothetical or an actual proposal we're asking feedback on?

1. No ethics needed
  - An interactive online **cohort call**

>   - Informal or pilot research intended to shape formal research questions, (depending on the research, this might also need an ethics process!). Examples might be a "dry run" of an interview script, or [autoethnographic research](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autoethnography) about current grant funding processes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Informal or pilot research intended to shape formal research questions, (depending on the research, this might also need an ethics process!). Examples might be a "dry run" of an interview script,  documenting our own experiences as reviewers or participants in grant funding processes, and synthesizing lessons learned. 
```

>   - Informal or pilot research intended to shape formal research questions, (depending on the research, this might also need an ethics process!). Examples might be a "dry run" of an interview script,  documenting our own experiences as reviewers or participants in grant funding processes, and synthesizing lessons learned. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - Some informal or pilot research intended to shape formal research questions. Examples might be a "dry run" of an interview script,  documenting our own experiences as reviewers or participants in grant funding processes, and synthesizing lessons learned. 
```

2. Some minimal ethics process, possibly just consent to share: 

>   - A cohort mid-term or end-of-cohort survey that goes on OLS's site but isn't used for publication. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A cohort mid-term or end-of-cohort survey that is published under a CC-BY license on OLS's site, with participant consent.
```
